All right, so in this lesson, we're going to learn a little bit about data types and variables.
This will not be an exhaustive lesson on these topics, but I want to give you enough of a foundation
so that when we pull it all together to do a little more analysis on the the code that we wrote in the
object oriented program and the Hello world, you'll have a basic understanding of what's going on.
So when we turn to the idea here, let's create a new class in the in the business project.
So I'm going to just highlight the source folder here, and I'm going to tell it.
I want to create a new class and I don't know.
I'll just create a person class here.
All right now.
So what are variables?
If you've ever taken algebra or even pre-algebra in school, you probably already pretty much know what
a variable is.
It's just a thing that can hold a value in algebra.
Its use usually a symbol.
It's usually a one character symbol in algebra like X or Y that can be assigned a value like three or
five, or sometimes even assigned an entire function like Y equals index plus B in programming and particularly
in Java, it's pretty similar.
Some differences are that variables in Java can be more than just one character like X or Y.
They can and often should be more descriptive names, and they can hold more than just numbers.
You can store numbers in them.
You can store references to objects in them.
So, yeah, you can.
You can use variables for a few more things than than in math, but same basic idea.
You are assigning a value to something and then you're giving that thing a name so that you can refer
back to it conveniently.
So as I said at the top of this lesson, this lesson is going to talk a little bit about data types
and variables.
Not only is Java an object oriented language, it is also a statically typed language.
What that means is that when we do assign values to variables in Java, we need to declare what type
of data we are storing in those variables or what type of data those variables are referring to that
is in opposition to dynamically typed languages where you don't need to specify what kind of data is
going into them.
So a language like JavaScript, for example, is a dynamically typed language.
You don't have to specify what you're putting in it in variables rather.
So some of the reasons why there are both dynamically typed languages and statically typed languages
kind of comes down to, to a certain extent to personal preferences and what kinds of code you're planning
to write or what what your needs are real quick.
So dynamic languages are often beloved by some people for a few reasons.
Some of those reasons could be that people feel like they can go a little faster with their coding because
they don't have.
They're not as encumbered with having to think about what the data types are and declaring them.
In some cases, the languages can figure it out on their own to a to a high degree and do the right
thing.
You should also know, though, that different types of data like integers that we're going to look
at in a moment here strings, integers and and other types of values and variable types cost something
in memory.
And so traditionally in programming, we wanted to be as conservative as we possibly could be with what
kinds of data types we were using, because different data types take up more room, more or less room
in the memory of the computer.
And until relatively recently in computer history, computers were very constrained with how much memory
they actually had.
It's only been very recently that we're getting to the point that a lot of people barely even care anymore
how much RAM is in their computers, but that was not always the case.
And for programmers, it definitely was not always the case.
And then there are also issues with programming itself, where sometimes dynamic languages like JavaScript
can be a little harder to debug because the computer has a harder time knowing definitely what kind
of data is stored in variables.
Whereas with static languages, there's no guesswork there at all.
You are very explicit about it.
So just a few points on some of the differences between statically typed and dynamically typed languages.
They have their pros and cons.
So let's look at a few examples of what I mean by this, and we've already seen a few, but I didn't
spend much time talking about them.
So let's see.
We had the we had in a previous program, we had a.
Person class and we had like a field that stored the first name, and I said something like this, right?
OK, so here I'm I'm declaring a variable called first name and the type of data that it can store is
a string.
And what a string is, is text.
OK.
A string is just text.
We'll have a whole lesson where we go much deeper into strings, but for now, just know that a string
is basically just text.
OK?
And so this variable firstname is capable of holding text.
And in this line here, I'm not assigning any text.
I could do that here.
If I don't assign any text right now, I'm simply declaring this variable.
I'm letting the Java system know that I need space to hold on to some text, and I'm going to call it
first name.
Now, I could assign or initialize this variable at the time of declaration.
Like right now, I could say something like Jack, and now I am initializing this variable right now.
Now, I could still change it later.
But if no value is ever set in this in this variable later in the program or whatever, this would be
its default value.
OK.
So I can initialize a variable at the time that I declare it a few more examples.
I could store the age, for example.
OK.
So here I'm creating a variable called age that stores data of type int, and that's short for integer.
So again, if you've ever taken algebra, you may recall that the concept of integers is very big in
algebra, and integer is simply a negative or positive whole number.
And in Java, it is the same.
However, integers in Java cannot be infinitely large.
There is a limit to the range, and we'll get into that in a lesson where we concentrate more on numbers
and what we can do with them.
But there are numbers.
Let's see.
There's and I'm not going to show every, every data type here either.
I just want to give you a general sense.
There's something called a long.
So you might see something like this in code often.
So a is also an integer, but it has a bigger range than integer.
OK.
And frequently, when you see Ides for a foreign object or something, oftentimes those will be modeled
as a long so that we can make sure that however many objects of that type we're going to create, we
have enough room for enough ideas.
Let's see.
We've got characters middle initial.
Maybe.
OK.
Not saying I would actually model a person in this way.
I probably wouldn't.
But there's there's one small example.
So a character is just one character of a string, right?
So.
So if I had a program that storing the first name and the middle initial may be, for some reason,
I would only want to model the middle initial to literally only be capable of holding one character,
right?
Just the person's one middle initial.
OK, so maybe I would use a care short for character for that.
An example of initializing this, by the way, would would look like this, J.
There are bytes.
I don't even know what would make sense there, but there are bytes.
There are a lot of data types, whole lot.
Now let's get into some slightly more advanced data types.
Well, so we did one here string.
OK, but let's do a couple more so we could have a company.
And I need to import that.
And we could have a news agency.
OK, so notice something here.
Some of the data types are white and then some of the data types are orange.
So why is that?
Well, these data types in white are actual classes, OK?
They are actual classes, which means that when an instance of these classes is created, what you're
actually creating is an object.
OK?
Whereas these orange data types here are not classes.
They are what are called primitives.
They are lower level than an actual object.
OK?
So there's a few differences here.
One is that since these are classes, these variables are meant to hold what are called a reference
to objects.
Classes give birth to objects.
We saw some examples of that in the object oriented lesson where we were creating person.
And in fact, here will jump over there real quick and just do a quick little refresher.
So here in the Hello World program, with this new keyword here we created an object or an instance
of a person that results in the creation of an object.
And then we took that that person object and assigned a reference to it to this variable, Tom.
OK, now I'll explain in just a moment what I mean by we assigned a reference to it, but that's what
we did.
OK.
So if we jump back over here to the business project again?
So, yeah, when we create variables that are four classes, those variables will hold a reference to
an object when we create variables for primitives.
There is no object.
OK.
So here this is a class.
And here we are creating an instance of that class a string.
OK.
I was saying a moment ago that when we create an instance of a class and and store it in a variable,
what we're actually storing as a reference.
Let me show you what that looks like for a minute here.
OK, so here, because I'm using this new keyword, I am creating an instance of my company.
So it's kind of like just to remind you from previous lesson.
Company is like a blueprint.
OK.
And when I say new company with parentheses, I'm telling Java, Take the blueprint for a company and
go build me an actual company.
Now go build one of these things.
And so Java asks the computer system on which it is running to give it a location where it can build.
In this case, the company.
OK.
And then once that company is built, Java will return not to me, but to the rest of the program.
It will return the address of that object that it just created.
And it is actually the address itself that gets stored in this variable.
So it's not the actual company.
It's actually a reference to the company.
And the reference that we use is the address.
It's almost like if you asked a builder to build a house for you.
And after they finished building the house, they dropped off a key and on the key was printed the address
of the new house that they built for you.
And they give you that.
OK.
So that key refers back to the house or the building that they just built for you?
So that's kind of what's happening here.
The Java system is building this object from the blueprint called company.
And then when it's done building it, it returns an address of where this object lives in memory in
your computer.
And that address is actually what is stored here.
OK.
And if you recall when we ran the Hello World program before and we tried to print out a variable that
was referring to a person object before we implemented the two string method, it actually printed out
an address.
And in fact, you know, it will do that real quick.
I will.
I'll create a quick little method here just to allow us to print out company.
And in order to make this work, I will have to make it static and you'll learn why I had to do that
in a later lesson.
But I have to make that static.
OK.
So this is going to print out whatever it knows about the company and let.
See what it actually prints, OK, and what it printed was business start company at.
And then like this hexadecimal number here, this hexadecimal number here is the actual location in
memory.
It's a memory address.
It is saying I have an object that is a business that company.
This is the fully qualified name of the company class that we are using here.
So it's saying I have an object that is a business company at this particular address in memory.
That is the default behavior that you will get whenever you create an object and you try to print it.
OK?
And this proves that when we create a new object, we are actually getting a reference to that object
by way of its address in memory.
If we were to create one more, I can just duplicate this and then I'll call this company one and I'll
duplicate this and refer to company one.
And then we run this again.
OK, now we get this printed out twice.
And each instance of the company has a different address, which makes sense because we asked Java to
build two different companies so they can't both reside at the same address.
Right?
OK, so let's talk a little bit about variable naming.
Generally speaking, variable names follow pretty much the same rules as class names.
Let me talk more about conventions, though the convention for most variable names, there are a there's
at least one exception here is that variable names begin with a lowercase letter, and that's just the
convention.
One of the reasons for that is in part to distinguish variable names from class names.
Class names by convention start with an uppercase variable.
Names by convention start with a lowercase one.
Exception to that, though, is what is called a constant.
So I'll show you an example of a constant.
Let's see if we did.
OK, so if we wanted to define a variable called PI and and whether well, yeah, and we assign it a
value at the time that we're creating it and I'm making it final, and that just means that I don't
ever want anyone to be able to change this later in the program.
So later on in the program, any time I want to refer to the value three point one four rather than
having to type out three point one four, I can just type PI.
And what's nice about this is it gives a name to this value so that it's potentially a little more meaningful
to the readers of this code.
OK.
And I don't have to do this just with numbers.
I can do this with with anything strings, whatever, any time I have a value that I might want to refer
to throughout my code and I want to give it a meaningful name, I could assign it to a constant.
So when I'm creating constants, constants by convention are all caps the whole entire thing.
And if you have a multi word constant, I'll create one of those.
My big constant.
OK.
So by convention, Constance, are all caps, and because they are all caps, we can't do camel case.
And so in that case, we use underscores to separate the words of the constant right.
So again, just a reminder of what camel case would look like.
Camel case would be like my big constant.
It would look like that.
OK.
But since constants are meant to be all uppercase, we use underscores instead.
So by no means is this an exhaustive review of variables and data types.
I just wanted to give a brief, slightly more formal introduction to variables and data types before
we jumped in to methods.
And then this will start to kind of pull everything together.
So that's about it for this lesson, and I'll see you in the next one.